<title>Alchemy</title>
<link href="markdown.css" rel="stylesheet"></link>
<script src="toc.js" type="text/javascript"></script>
<body onload="generateTOC(document.getElementById('toc'));">

# Introduction

`Alchemy` is a new build system based on the one used in Android. A central
makefile instance scans a workspace to find user makefiles, includes them and
register modules to be built. Modules are described by a set of variables
(`LOCAL_XXX`) specifying source files, custom compilation flags, include
directories and some other more advanced stuff.

Modules can be libraries (static and shared), executable, prebuilt binaries of
components built by another build system (like autotools suite for many linux
packages). Build of external modules is similar to what is done in buildroot.

`Alchemy` is hence a mix of what can be done in Android (building source files
without having to write complicated makefile/autoconfo.ac) and buildroot
(building open-source components having there own makefile/configure/cmake)

`Alchemy` supports:

* building static/shared libraries and executables from source code.
* building autotools/cmake from archives or source tree.
* building qmake applications.
* building for linux/ios/macos/android/windows targets.
* building on linux/macos hosts.

`Alchemy` uses gnu make and shell/python scripts to do the job. The
configuration tool is kconfig (as on linux/buildroot/busybox) and prebuilt
binaries are provided on linux/macos hosts.

A first working example is how kconfig binaries are built (see kconfig subdir
and its atom.mk/build.sh)

As the build system is real close in its philosophy to the Android one, please
take a look at the following documentation to have a overview of the system.
This build system differs mainly in the set of `LOCAL_XXX` variables supported.

[Android build system](android-build-system.html)

[Android ndk build system](android-mk.html)

**Note** : This documentation tries to be up to date but take a look at
the file `variables.mk` for a complete list of `LOCAL_xxx` and `TARGET_xxx`
variables that can be used. It also has some description of variables.

* * *

<div id="toc"></div>

* * *

## Environment

To work correctly, the build system needs to be configured with target specific
information.

At a minimum, `TARGET_PRODUCT`, `TARGET_PRODUCT_VARIANT` and `TARGET_CONFIG_DIR`
are required. Other variables can be set in the `product.mk` file located in
`TARGET_CONFIG_DIR`. This way environment is not cluttered with variables.

Optionally, some `TARGET_XXX` or `HOST_XXX` variables can be prefixed with
`ALCHEMY_` to avoid conflict with other build systems (android for example).

* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_PRODUCT`
* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_PRODUCT_VARIANT`
* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_CONFIG_DIR`
* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_OUT`
* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_SKEL_DIRS`
* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_SCAN_ADD_DIRS`
* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_SCAN_PRUNE_DIRS`
* `ALCHEMY_TARGET_SDK_DIRS`
* `ALCHEMY_USE_COLORS`
* `ALCHEMY_HOST_OUT_BUILD`
* `ALCHEMY_HOST_OUT_STAGING`

### Target

* `TARGET_OS` : Specify the OS of the target. Possible values are :
  * `linux`.
  * `ecos`.
  * `baremetal`.
  * `darwin`.
  * `android` : alias for `linux` OS with `android` flavour. `TARGET_ARCH` defaults to `arm`.
  * `iphone` : alias for `darwin` OS with `iphoneos` flavour.
  * `iphonesimulator` : alias for `darwin` OS with `iphonesimulator` flavour.
  * `parrot` : alias for `linux` OS with `parrot` flavour. `TARGET_ARCH` defaults to `arm`.
  * `yocto` : alias for `linux` OS with `yocto` flavour. `TARGET_ARCH` defaults to `arm`.
  </br>Default is `linux` on linux hosts, and `darwin` on mac hosts.
* `TARGET_OS_FLAVOUR` : Flavour of the OS, depending on `TARGET_OS`.

  For `linux` :
  * `parrot` for linux-only product.
  * `android` for android products.
  * `native` or `native-chroot` for pc.
  * `yocto` for build with Yocto SDK.

  For `darwin` :
  * `iphoneos` for iOS devices.
  * `iphonesimulator` for iOS simulator.
  * `native` for mac.
   </br>Default is `native`.
* `TARGET_LIBC` : Libc to be used. Normally automatically guessed based on other
  settings. Mainly to be used in `atom.mk` files to select different behaviours.
  * `bionic` for android libc.
  * `eglibc` for embedded linux.
  * `ecos` for ecos OS.
  * `native` for native libc on pc.
  * `darwin` for mac and iphone.
  </br>Default is :
     * `bionic` if `TARGET_OS` is `linux` and `TARGET_OS_FLAVOUR` is `android`.
     * `native` if `TARGET_OS` is `linux` and `TARGET_OS_FLAVOUR` is `native` or
       `native-chroot`.
     * `eglibc` if `TARGET_OS` is `linux`.
     * `ecos` if `TARGET_OS` is `ecos`.
     * `darwin` if `TARGET_OS` is `darwin`.
* `TARGET_ARCH` : Architecture of the target. Useful to select prebuilt binaries
  based on architecture. Possible values are :
  * `arm`
  * `aarch64`
  * `x86`
  * `x64`
  </br>Default is `x86` or `x64`, depending on the host system.
* `TARGET_CPU` : Cpu of the target. This value is typically used to select
  optimization and select some module (for ex: linux). Possible values are :
  * `p6`
  * `p6i`
  * `armv5te`
  * `p7`
  * `o3`
  * `omap3`
  * `omap4`
  * `armv7a`
  * `armv7a-neon`
  * `tegrak1`
  * `tegrax1`
  * `arm7tdmi`
  </br>Default is empty (no specific optimization activated).
* `TARGET_PRODUCT`: Name of the product. Mainly used for determining some other
  default values.
* `TARGET_PRODUCT_VARIANT` : Variant of the product. Mainly used for determining
  some other default values.
* `TARGET_OUT` : Full path to folder to be used as root for output files.
   </br>Default is `Alchemy-out`.
* `TARGET_OUT_BUILD` : Full path to folder where intermediate objects will be
  stored. Each module will have its own sub-folder inside.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_OUT)/build`.
  </br>Note: setting this variable is deprecated
* `TARGET_OUT_STAGING` : Full path to folder where modules built will be copied
  or installed. This folder will also contain include files needed to build
  intermediates modules (`alchemy` also supports using include files from the
  source tree). Binaries in this folder will always contain symbols.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_OUT)/staging`.
  </br>Note: setting this variable is deprecated
* `TARGET_OUT_FINAL` : Full path to folder where the final image will be
  created. A script generates this by copying from staging folder required files
  for execution (based on some exclusion pattern to skip documentation and
  include files for examples). It also strips binaries, includes libc files from
  the toolchain and merges an external skeleton with other essential files
  provided by the product.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_OUT)/final`.
  </br>Note: setting this variable is deprecated
* `TARGET_OUT_GCOV` : Full path to folder where the gcno files will be put.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_OUT)/gcov`.
* `TARGET_CONFIG_DIR` : Full path to folder where the configuration files are
  stored. If not set, it is assumed that there will be no configurable module
  and everything will be built.
  </br>Default is `Alchemy-config/$(TARGET_PRODUCT)-$(TARGET_PRODUCT_VARIANT)`.
* `TARGET_SKEL_DIRS` : List of full path to skeleton directories to merge when
  generating final tree. The path are separated by space.

### Tools.

* `TARGET_CROSS` : full path to toolchain prefix.
  For example : `/opt/arm-eglibc/bin/arm-none-linux-gnueabi-`.
  </br>Default depends on other target settings.
* `TARGET_CC` : full path to C compiler.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)gcc`.
* `TARGET_CXX` : full path to C++ compiler.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)g++`.
* `TARGET_FC` : full path to Fortran compiler.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)gfortran`.
* `TARGET_AR` : full path to archive maker.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)ar`.
* `TARGET_LD` : full path to linker.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)ld`.
* `TARGET_NM` : full path to symbol lister.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)nm`.
* `TARGET_STRIP` : full path to symbol stripper.
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)strip`.
* `TARGET_LLVM` : full path to LLVM prefix (meaningful only when LLVM is used).
  </br>Default is `$(TARGET_CROSS)llvm-`.

### Linux specific
* `TARGET_LINUX_CROSS` : similar to `TARGET_CROSS` but to use a separate
  toolchain for the compilation of the linux kernel (and drivers).
* `TARGET_LINUX_DIR` : path to linux kernel source tree. Used by some tools for
  dome drivers that need access to internal linux headers.
* `TARGET_LINUX_LINK_CPIO_IMAGE` : set to `1` to link the cpio image inside the
  kernel. During cpio image generation, the kernel will be re-linked to add it
  inside. Also, required options are internally set in linux config. Although
  only the copy in build directory is modified, the original one is not touched.
  </br>Default is `0`
* `TARGET_LINUX_INSTALL_DEVICE_TREE` : enable linux kernel devicetree install target
  rule: `dtbs_install`. The install directory shall be defined in `TARGET_LINUX_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS`
  via linux kernel `INSTALL_DTBS_PATH` environment variable added to it.
  This override `TARGET_LINUX_DEVICE_TREE_NAMES`
  </br>(i.e `TARGET_LINUX_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS := INSTALL_DTBS_PATH="$(TARGET_OUT_STAGING)/boot"`)
  </br>Default is `0`
* `TARGET_LINUX_DEVICE_TREE_NAMES` : list of device tree name to copy in boot
  directory. It shall be in `$(LINUX_BUILD_DIR)/arch/$(TARGET_ARCH)/boot/dts`.
  The names shall be the ones with the `.dtb` extension. Default is empty.
* `TARGET_LINUX_GENERATE_UIMAGE` : generate a u-boot image of linux.
  </br>Default is `0`
* `TARGET_LINUX_IMAGE` : linux image to generate and copy in boot directory.
  </br>Default is `zImage` for arm, `bzImage` for `x86` and `x64`,
  `Image` for `aarch64`
* `TARGET_LINUX_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS` : Additional variables to be given as
  parameters to the kernel build commands (using make).

### Darwin specific

* `TARGET_IPHONE_VERSION` : when targetting `iphoneos` or `iphonesimulator`,
  allows specifying the minimum supported version of iOS.
  </br>Default is `8.2`
* `TARGET_MACOS_VERSION` : when targetting `native` (e.g. MacOS desktop),
  allows specifying the minimum supported version of OSX.
  </br>Default is `10.10`

### Android specific
Alchemy supports targetting Android in two configurations: either using an
official Android NDK, or using a custom-built Android system.

* When the `Alchemy-android` package is present, Alchemy will automatically use
it when targetting Android.
* Otherwise, alchemy will try to use an Android NDK. This mode supports a few options:
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_APILEVEL` : Android API level to target.
  </br>Default is `17`
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_MINAPILEVEL` : Minimum Android API Level required for the application to run.
  </br>Default is `TARGET_ANDROID_APILEVEL`
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_NDK` : Path of the Android NDK to use.
  </br>Default tries to auto-detect the NDK from a few somewhat standard location (`/opt/android-ndk-*`, `~/android-ndk-*`, ...)
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_SDK` : Path of the Android SDK to use.
  </br>Default tries to auto-detect the SDK from a few somewhat standard location (`/opt/android-sdk*`, `~/android-sdk*`, ...)
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_TOOLCHAIN` : name of the android toolchain, e.g. arm-linux-androideabi-4.7.
  </br>Default is the default toolchain for the current target architecture (`TARGET_ARCH`).
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_TOOLCHAIN_VERSION` : version of the android toolchain, e.g. 4.8. Ignored if `TARGET_ANDROID_TOOLCHAIN` is specified.
  </br>Default is the default toolchain version for the current target architecture (`TARGET_ARCH`).
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_STL` : specify the C++ Standard Template Library implementation to use. The NDK supports multiple STL implementations, which can be selected with this variable. Supported values are : `gnustl`, the GNU libstdc++; `libc++`, LLVM's libc++; and `stlport`.
  </br>Default is the GNU libstdc++.
  * `TARGET_ANDROID_SHARED_STL` : by default, Android NDK uses a static version of the C++ Standard library, which works only when generating a single shared library or executable. Setting this variable to `1` switches to a shared library version of the STL, which is needed if the project contains multiple shared libraries or executables. In that case, the shared library must be copied to the target device.

### Yocto specific
Alchemy supports building by using Yocto SDK.

* These options can be defined for Yocto build:
  * `TARGET_YOCTO_VERSION` : Yocto version.
  </br>Default is `1.8`
  * `TARGET_YOCTO_SDK` : Path of Yocto SDK to use.
  </br>Default tries to auto-detect the SDK from a few somewhat standard location (`/opt/poky*`, `~/Library/poky*`, `~/poky*`, ...)

### Global flags for tools.
Normally not needed, default values are determined based on target setting.
Mainly used by the android wrapper.

* `TARGET_GLOBAL_C_INCLUDES` : List of full path to directories to add for all
  file compiled. The -I prefix will be appended so do not put it.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_ASFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the assembler.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_CFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the C **and** C++ compiler.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_CXXFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the C++ compiler only.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_ARFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the archive maker.
  </br>Default is `rcs`, so you should never have to define it.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_LDFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the linker.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_LDLIBS` : Additional libraries to use when linking.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_PCHFLAGS` : Flags to pass when precompiling headers.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_OBJCFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the Objective-C compiler.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_OBJCXXFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the Objective-C++ compiler.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_FFLAGS` : Flags to pass to the Fortran compiler.

### Specific flags for arm targets.
Normally not needed, default values are determined based on target setting.
Mainly used by the android wrapper.

* `TARGET_GLOBAL_CFLAGS_arm` : Flags to pass to the C **and** C++ compiler to
  compile in `arm` mode. Normally managed internally but can be overridden.
* `TARGET_GLOBAL_CFLAGS_thumb` : Flags to pass to the C **and** C++ compiler to
  compile in `thumb` mode. Normally managed internally but can be overridden.
* `TARGET_DEFAULT_ARM_MODE` : Mode to use by default at compilation time
  (`arm` or `thumb`). Default is `thumb`, however modules can override this in
  their `LOCAL_ARM_MODE`. It is only possible to override `thumb` mode in `arm`
  mode, not the other way.
* `TARGET_DEFAULT_ARM_MODE_EXTERNAL` : similar to `TARGET_DEFAULT_ARM_MODE` but
  for external modules (autotools, cmake...). Default is `arm` for compatibility
  with previous behaviour.

### Other variables

* `TARGET_FORCE_STATIC` : Can be set to `1` to force the compilation of libraries
  as static even if module requested to build a shared one. This option impacts
  all modules (internal AND external).
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_PBUILD_FORCE_STATIC` : Similar to `TARGET_FORCE_STATIC` but module
  shall also set `LOCAL_PBUILD_ALLOW_FORCE_STATIC` to `1` to be compiled as static.
  This option only impacts modules of class `SHARED` and `LIBRARY`.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_PBUILD_HOOK_USE_DESCRIBE` : Can be set to `1` to save tags of libraries
  used in binary. It can be retrieved at run time with pal function
  `pal_lib_desc_get_table_entry`.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_SCAN_PRUNE_DIRS` : A list of directories to exclude from the scan when
  searching for `atom.mk`. It can be absolute path or single name like `raptor`.
  `Alchemy` automatically excludes its own output directory, but feel free to
  add any known directories that will not contain `atom.mk`.
  </br>Default is empty.
* `TARGET_SCAN_ADD_DIRS` : A list of directories to add during the scan when
  searching for `atom.mk`.
  </br>Default is empty.
* `TARGET_SCAN_FOLLOW_LINKS` : Set to `1` to follow symbolic links when scanning
  for `atom.mk` files. When set to `0`, symbolic links to directories are not
  searched.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_FORCE_EXTERNAL_CHECKS` : Set to `1` to force check of external modules
  even if they are already built. See chapter relating to recompilation checks
  for more information.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_NOSTRIP_FINAL` : Can be set at `1` to prevent stripping binaries when
  generating final directory. Setting to `2` does a partial stripping: debug info
  is removed, but symbol table is kept. This is useful for tools like perf.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_STRIP_FILTER` : List of filenames to filter during strip. Mainly used
  when valgrind or other tracing tool is used and requires debugging symbols
  on the target. This is an alternative to `TARGET_NOSTRIP_FINAL` that keeps
  **ALL** debugging symbols. This variable allows fine tunning. The list
  specifies only names, not path.
  </br>**Note** : when valgrind is activated, `alchemy` automatically filters the
  linux loader as well as the libc and some valgrind libraries.
  </br>Default is empty.
* `TARGET_ADD_DEPENDS_SECTION` : Activate the generation of an extra section in
  executables and shared libraries built by `alchemy`. This sections contains
  the list of modules used for the link and their revision. The first line
  contains the revision of the linked module itself.
  </br>**Note** : this feature requires `USE_GIT_REV` at `1` (disabled by default).
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_DEPENDS_SECTION_NAME` : Name of the section with dependencies
  </br>Default is `.alchemy.depends`.
* `TARGET_SDK_DIRS` : List of directories where to find `SDK` previously
  generated. Default is empty.
* `TARGET_PERMISSIONS_FILES` : List of files containing permissions to apply to
  files and directories when generating the image (plf) from the final directory.
  The format of those permissions files is : `pattern mode user group`.
  * `pattern` : file or directory pattern (regex) to test. Patterns for
    directories ends with a `/`. Pattern can also be a real path, it should then
    be enclosed by double quotes (ex: "/etc/hosts" 0644 root root).
  * `mode` : unix mode to apply, in octal notation.
  * `user`, `group` : name of user and group to apply. The uid and gid is
    extracted automatically from `/etc/passwd` and `/etc/group` files found in
    final directory.
* `TARGET_CHROOT` : Set to 1 if the result of the compilation will be executed
  in a chroot environment. Used by some modules to adapt their configuration.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_BUILD_PROPERTIES` : list of properties to put in file build.prop
  loaded by boxinit at startup. The format is a list of `<key>=<value>` pair.
  Default contains some `ro.build` keys that alchemy will put.
  Note : each module can also specify its own properties in `LOCAL_BUILD_PROPERTIES`.
* `TARGET_INCLUDE_GDBSERVER` : include gdbserver binary in target. This binary
  is GPLv3 and is needed only in development phase and shall not be present in
  final release packages.
  </br>Default is `1`.
* `TARGET_INCLUDE_TZDATA` : include time zone data from libc.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_INCLUDE_GCONV` : include gconv libraries from libc.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_INCLUDE_GFORTRAN` : include Fortran libraries from toolchain.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `TARGET_USE_CXX_EXCEPTIONS` : enable c++ exceptions.
  </br>Default is `1`.
* `TARGET_LDCONFIG_DIRS` : list of directories to add in ldconfig cache. Path
  should be absolute and for the target. Standard path are already included
  by `Alchemy` (/lib/<arch>, /lib, /usr/lib/<arch>, /usr/lib).
* `TARGET_IMAGE_FORMAT` : format of the image file to generate with `image` command.
  Supported value: `tar`, `cpio`, `ext2`, `ext3`, `ext4`, `plf` and the compressed
  forms `tar.gz`, `cpio.gz`, `ext2.gz`, `ext3.gz`, `ext4.gz`,
  `tar.bz2`, `cpio.bz2`, `ext2.bz2`, `ext3.bz2`, `ext4.bz2`,
  `tar.zip`, `cpio.zip`, `ext2.zip`, `ext3.zip`, `ext4.zip`
  </br>Default is `tar.gz`.
* `TARGET_IMAGE_OPTIONS` : additional options to give during image generation:
  * `--size <val> [<unit>]` : size of image (for `ext` format), unit is `K`, `M`, `G`
  * `--filter <path>` : path (relative to root fs) to skip during image generation
  </br>Default is empty.
* `TARGET_FINAL_MODE`: how to create the final directory. Supported value:
  * `full`: nothing is filtered.
  * `firmware`: filtered according to internal heuristics suitable for embedded
    execution.
  </br>Default is `firmware`.
* `TARGET_LINUX_RELEASE` : linux kernel release to build kernel modules against it.
  This variable can be used only if building for `native` target.
  </br>Default is `$(shell uname -r)`.
* `TARGET_NO_UNDEFINED` : Enable check of undefined symbols for dynamic libraries,
  which triggers error at dynamic libraries build.
  </br>Default is `1`.

* `USE_CLANG` `TARGET_USE_CLANG`: Use clang instead of gcc for compilation.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `USE_CCACHE` : Use ccache to speed up compilation.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `USE_SCAN_CACHE` : Use cache of `atom.mk` found during last scan. Useful if
  the scan is slow on your machine.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `USE_COLORS` : Use colors in output.
  </br>Default is `0`.
* `USE_GIT_REV` : Retrieve git revision of modules to force compilation of
  external modules when the related project is updated.
  </br>Default is `1`.
* `USE_CONFIG_CHECK` : Enable check of config before the build. Only need to be
  disabled in some sdk use cases.
  </br>Default is `1`.
* `USE_COVERAGE` : Enable options for coverage (and disable compiler optimisations).
  </br>Default is `0`. Can be set to a list of modules or 1 for all modules.
* `USE_ADDRESS_SANITIZER` : Enable options for address sanitizer.
  </br>Default is `0`. Can be set to a list of modules or 1 for all modules.
* `USE_MEMORY_SANITIZER` : Enable options for memory sanitizer.
  </br>Default is `0`. Set to 1 to enable.
* `USE_THREAD_SANITIZER` : Enable options for thread sanitizer.
  </br>Default is `0`. Can be set to a list of modules or 1 for all modules.
* `USE_UNDEFINED_SANITIZER` : Enable options for undefined sanitizer.
  </br>Default is `0`. Can be set to a list of modules or 1 for all modules.
* `USE_AUTO_LIB_PREFIX` : Automatically add 'lib' prefix when building an library
  whose name is not specified. This is needed for dynamic libraries on some platforms.
  </br>Default is `0`.

## Configuration

`Alchemy` allows the selection of available modules that will actually be built
as well as configuring settings of modules. A global configuration file stores
the list of selected modules and each configurable module stores its own
settings. Those file are saved in the `TARGET_CONFIG_DIR` directory. However, it
is possible to customize for each module the actual configuration file to use.

### Global configuration file

The global configuration file contains the list of registered modules that will
be built. This is useful in a workspace where everything is cloned and to select
only a subset for compilation. Makefile targets available for that are :

* `config` : display a qconf window to select modules.
* `config-check` : check that the configuration file is up to date and display
  a message if not.
* `config-update` : silently update the configuration. Dependencies will also
  be updated.

The file is saved as `$(TARGET_CONFIG_DIR)/global.config`

### Module configuration files

`Alchemy` allows modules to be configurable using the kconfig syntax. Module
configuration will appear in the same kconfig interface where selection of
modules to be built is done.

To specify a list of file and load current configuration add the following in
the `atom.mk` :

<pre>
# Set config.in files and load configuration. Files are relative to LOCAL_PATH.
LOCAL_CONFIG_FILES := \
	Build/ConfigSoprano.in \
	Build/ConfigSopranoTTS.in
$(call load-config)

ifdef CONFIG_SOPRANO_MPP_ENABLE
....
endif
</pre>

If the option is checked, it is defined to 'y', otherwise it is not defined at
all. So it is possible to simplify test

<pre>
# This is possible but more complex for just 'on/off' options.
ifeq ("$(CONFIG_SOPRANO_MPP_ENABLE)","y")
....
endif
</pre>

The file is saved as `$(TARGET_CONFIG_DIR)/<module>.config`

For each configurable module, an `autoconf-<module>.h` file will be generated
and automatically included during compilation. Modules depending on a
configurable module will also have this file automatically included.

A global `autoconf-merge.h` is also generated by concatenating all other files.
It is available by the variable `AUTOCONF_MERGE_FILE`.

**Note** : Even if configurations are separated, it is preferable for a module
to not depend on another module's configuration.

## Customization

Given a workspace with `alchemy` it is possible to add some hooks to customize
some default behaviours.

### `product.mk`

This file, if found in the folder pointed to by `TARGET_CONFIG_DIR`, is included
and allow tuning of some variables (basically all `TARGET_XXX` variables)

### `Alchemy-debug-setup.mk`

This file, if found at the root of the workspace, is included and allow tuning
debug variables or set variables that can be used by some modules.

To set some debug flags, simply put a line like :
<pre>
debug.blues.CFLAGS := -O0
debug.softat.CFLAGS := -O0
</pre>

`CFLAGS`, `CXXFLAGS` and `LDFLAGS` are overridable.

**Note** : If you try to put a debug flag directly in an `atom.mk` you will get
an error. This is to avoid committing debug flags in git repositories. The
`Alchemy-debug-setup.mk` shall be used and shall never be committed, it shall be
local to a developer workspace.

An example of use by a module of variable defined in `Alchemy-debug-setup.mk` is
in the `bluebox` module of `pulsar` project. This module gets the ip address to
put in the product by reading a variable. This variable can be from the
environment or from the `Alchemy-debug-setup.mk` file.

### Location of module configuration files.

By default, module configuration files are searched in the folder pointer to by
`TARGET_CONFIG_DIR`. However, if you pass a variable named
`custom.<module>.config` as an argument of make, or alchemake this will override
the location. You can also set this variable in `product.mk` or
`Alchemy-debug-setup.mk`.

### Special customization of configuration files.

It is possible to fine tune existing configuration files and apply `sed` files
to them to change a flag. `sed` files to be applied to a module configuration
file is indicated in a variable `custom.<module>.config.sedfiles`. Several
`sed` files can be specified.

When `sed` files are specified, a copy of the original configuration file is
made in the build directory and `sed` files are applied there. However when the
configuration tool is used, the original file is edited.

The `custom.<module>.config.sedfiles` variable can be given as argument of make
or alchemake as well as in `product.mk` or `Alchemy-debug-setup.mk`.

## Anatomy of an `atom.mk`

The first thing that shall be done in an `atom.mk` is to get its path in the
variable `LOCAL_PATH` :

<pre>
LOCAL_PATH := $(call my-dir)
</pre>

This shall be done only once per `atom.mk` file and it shall be done before
anything else. Internally it relies on the variable `MAKEFILE_LIST` to get the
full path of the directory where the `atom.mk` file is (without the trailing '/').
Then, one or more module definitions will follow.

A module definition shall always starts with :
<pre>
include $(CLEAR_VARS)
</pre>

A module definition shall always end with :
<pre>
include $(BUILD_XXX)
</pre>

See below for possible `BUILD_XXX` values

During module definition, only `LOCAL_XXX` variables shall be modified (except
`LOCAL_PATH` set at the beginning of the `atom.mk` file). It is also possible to
define module specific variables by prefixing them with the module name. However,
their use shall be limited to the scope of the `atom.mk` file where they are
defined. No reference to a variable declared by another `atom.mk` file shall
be done because the order of inclusion is not guaranteed or predictable.

For each registered modules, following `make` targets will be available :

* `make <module>` : will build the module and its dependencies.
* `make <module>-clean` : will clean the module. For autotools modules, the
   unpacked sources and applied patches will be kept in the build directory.
* `make <module>-dirclean` : will remove the build directory of the module.
* `make <module>-doc` : will generate the documentation for the module.
* `make <module>-path` : will display the path of the module.
* `make <module>-codeformat` : will format source files.
* `make <module>-codecheck` : will check coding style of source files.
* `make <module>-cloc` : will count the number of lines of code.

### Module registration

Several classes of modules are managed by `alchemy` :

* `STATIC_LIBRARY`
* `SHARED_LIBRARY`
* `LIBRARY`
* `EXECUTABLE`
* `AUTOTOOLS`
* `CMAKE`
* `QMAKE`
* `PYTHON_PACKAGE`
* `CUSTOM`
* `META_PACKAGE`
* `LINUX_MODULE`

Module will be referred as either `internal` or `external` :

* Internal modules are `STATIC_LIBRARY`, `SHARED_LIBRARY`, `LIBRARY` and
  `EXECUTABLE` modules because they are completely managed by the build system.
* External modules are `AUTOTOOLS`, `CMAKE`, `QMAKE`, `PYTHON_PACKAGE`,
  `CUSTOM`, `META_PACKAGE` and `LINUX_MODULE` modules because the build system has little
  control on the way those modules are built.

**Note** : `LIBRARY` can be used to compile both static and shared version of a
module. The given `LOCAL_FILENAME`, if any, shall be the name of the shared
version. Internally, the static name will be deduced by replacing the shared
suffix (`.so`) by the static suffix (`.a`). See chapter about `LOCAL_LIBRARIES`
for more information.

**Note** : there is also a `PREBUILT` class but its used is reserved for the
build system and should not normally be used by user makefiles. It is present to
declare system modules to be used as dependencies.

### Common part

Both `internal` and `external` modules share a common base for their
registration and their use. The only mandatory variable to set in a module is
its name :

<pre>
LOCAL_MODULE := module-name
</pre>

The name of the module can contains any character from the range :
`[a-z] [A-Z] [0-9] '_' '-'`

The convention is to use only lower case characters and use '-' as a word
separator. The module name will serve as the default name of the binary for
`internal` modules (with its extension appended automatically).

#### `LOCAL_MODULE_FILENAME`

This can be used to override the name of `internal` modules. For `external`
modules it is used to create special `done` files to indicate that the module
has been built (using a `touch` on the file). This shall be a simple file name
without path specification. The extension shall be specified if required.

#### `LOCAL_DESTDIR`

This is the destination path relative to root of target file system. Default is
`usr/bin` for executables and `usr/lib` for libraries.

#### `LOCAL_DESCRIPTION`

This is the description of the module that will be displayed in `qconf` window
when configuring the build.

#### `LOCAL_CATEGORY_PATH`

This is the logical path this module belongs. It will be used to display the
`qconf` configuration window independently from the file system layout. Event if
there is no constraints on the value, please follow the categories already
provided by the platform teams.

#### `LOCAL_LIBRARIES`

This is a list of modules this module depends on. Unlike android build system,
it is not needed to explicitly specify the class of the module in variables like
`LOCAL_STATIC_LIBRARIES` or `LOCAL_SHARED_LIBRARIES`. The class of the module is
inferred from its own registration. This way a module can changes its class
between `STATIC` and `SHARED` without the need of changing the chain of
dependency. However, if a module is registered as `LIBRARY`, both static and
shared versions will be available. By default, the shared version is used
unless the dependency is explicitely listed in `LOCAL_STATIC_LIBRARIES`.

For all modules listed in the definition of an `internal` module :
`C_INCLUDES`, `CFLAGS`, `CXXFLAGS`, `LDLIBS`, `PREREQUISITES`, exported by
modules will be imported in this module. If a static library is specified in
the list, a recursion will be done to import its own dependencies.

For all modules listed in the definition of an `external` module :
Only `PREREQUISITES` exported by modules will be imported in this module.

`External` modules listed as dependencies will be completely built before this
module. `Internal` modules listed as dependencies will be compiled in parallel
with this module, only the link of dependencies will be done before this module.
So if a module needs to generate some files that will be needed during the
compilation of modules depending on it, they shall be exported in the
prerequisites to be sure they are generated at the correct time. An example will
be headers installed in staging directories. If they are not explicitly
specified in prerequisites export, it will not work in a parallel build.

When generating a public sdk, the set of dependencies should be split in 2.

* `LOCAL_PUBLIC_LIBRARIES`: list of public module whose headers may be used in
  public headers of the current module.
* `LOCAL_PRIVATE_LIBRARIES`: list of private modules only used when compiling
  the current module.

#### `LOCAL_CONDITIONAL_LIBRARIES`

This is a list of pair `variable:module` to indicate that a module is needed
only if a variable (found in a `config.in` file) is defined. Although it is
possible to explicitly put a conditional in the `atom.mk`, it is recommended to
use this technique to make sure that `kconfig` will also see this conditional
dependency. Without it it would not be possible to disable a module once the
configuration variable is enabled: the configuration editor would need to be
launched 2 times, one to disable the variable, another to disable the module.

If a configuration variable needs to select several modules, specify it in
several pairs `variable:module`.

Internally modules will be added to `LOCAL_LIBRARIES` if the variable is defined
in the configuration.

If `variable` is `OPTIONAL`, the module is put as a dependency if it is in
the build configuration or if it is a host module. This allow to depends on a
module only if it is enabled. The `kconfig` tools will not display this
dependency, only the build system will use it.

#### `LOCAL_DEPENDS_HEADERS`

This is a list of modules whose headers are required to compile but not for
link. This does **NOT** introduce a build order, just an automatic import of
exported headers. This instruction does **NOT** handle dependencies well, it
only allows one level dependency. If more than one level of dependency is
needed, use a `CUSTOM` class module which exports headers.

#### `LOCAL_DEPENDS_MODULES`

This is a list of modules required at build time. They will be built before
this module but nothing will be imported from them (flags, headers, libs).

#### `LOCAL_REQUIRED_MODULES`

This is a list of modules required at runtime that will automatically be
selected in the `qconf` configuration window. This does **NOT** introduce a
build order.

#### `LOCAL_FORCE_STATIC`

If set to `1`, forces to use static libraries instead of shared libraries for
all dependencies. It only forces internal modules, not external ones and only
if a static version of the dependncy is available (module is `STATIC` or `LIBRARY`).

#### `LOCAL_BUILD_PROPERTIES`

List of properties to put in file build.prop loaded by boxinit at startup.
The format is a list of `<key>=<value>` pair.

#### `LOCAL_CONFIG_FILES`

List of `Config.in` files relative to `LOCAL_PATH` to be used to configure the
module. See `kconfig` language specification for more information about its
syntax. All settings specified in this file shall be prefixed by the name of the
module to avoid name collision when the global configuration file is created by
the build system. To actually load the configuration and have access to settings
the following shall be done :

<pre>
$(call load-config)
</pre>

After this, all settings variables can be used. Please note that they will all
be prefixed by `CONFIG_` when used inside the makefile.

**Note** : to test for a boolean settings, it is best to do :
<pre>
ifdef CONFIG_XXX
</pre>
instead of
<pre>
ifeq ($(CONFIG_XXX),y)
</pre>

It is shorter and allow to use the flag `--warn-undefined-variables` during
`make` invocation.

#### `LOCAL_COPY_FILES`

List of files to be copied in the staging directory. Files are specified like
this: `src:dst`

* `src` is the source file, relative to `LOCAL_PATH`.
* `dst` is the destination file, relative to `TARGET_OUT_STAGING`.

If `dst` ends with a `'/'` it is assumed to be the destination directory and the
file name is deduced from `src`.

If `src` or `dst` start with a `'/'` it is assumed to be a full path, in this
case `LOCAL_PATH` is not prepended for `src` and `TARGET_OUT_STAGING` is not
prepended for `dst`.

**Note** : There is no build order between copied files and modules depending
on the one copying the file. If you want to make sure that copied files are
available for other module, either put copied files in `LOCAL_EXPORT_PREREQUISITES`
or use `LOCAL_INSTALL_HEADERS`.

#### `LOCAL_COPY_DIRS`

List of directories to be copied in the staging directory. Directories are specified like
this: `src:dst`

* `src` is the source directory, relative to `LOCAL_PATH`.
* `dst` is the destination directory, relative to `TARGET_OUT_STAGING`.

If `src` or `dst` start with a `'/'` it is assumed to be a full path, in this
case `LOCAL_PATH` is not prepended for `src` and `TARGET_OUT_STAGING` is not
prepended for `dst`.

Internally it simply lists the content of the source directory and copy each file
as if it was given in `LOCAL_COPY_FILES`

#### `LOCAL_CREATE_LINKS`

List of symbolic links to be created in the staging directory. Format is
`name:target`

* `name` : name of the link, relative to `TARGET_OUT_STAGING`.
* `target` : target of the link. This path will be interpreted in the final
  target so there is no restriction on the actual format.

If `name` starts with a `'/'` it is assumed to be a full path, in this
case `TARGET_OUT_STAGING` is not prepended.

**Note** : There is no build order between created links and modules depending
on the one creating the link. Use `LOCAL_EXPORT_PREREQUISITES` also.

#### `LOCAL_INSTALL_HEADERS`

List of headers to be installed in the staging directory. The format is the same
than `LOCAL_COPY_FILES`.

**Note** : internally this is a combination of `LOCAL_COPY_FILES` and
`LOCAL_EXPORT_PREREQUISITES`. It means that headers will be installed before
anything depending on this module is built.

#### `LOCAL_CLEAN_FILES` `LOCAL_CLEAN_DIRS`

List of files (respectively directories) to be automatically removed during
cleaning of the module. Full path shall be specified and normally they refer to
path in build or staging directories.

#### `LOCAL_PREREQUISITES`

List of files that shall exist prior to do anything in the module. Full path
shall be specified (and usually they reside in the module build directory).

A custom makefile rule shall exists to instruct make how to generate and update
those prerequisites files.

**Note** : files listed here will be specified as order-only prerequisites in
the generated make rules. It means that if the file is later modified it will
**NOT** trigger a recompilation. Custom dependencies shall be added if this is
required

Example:
<pre>
SOFTAT_BUILD_DIR := $(call local-get-build-dir)
SOFTAT_CONFIG_READ_H := $(SOFTAT_BUILD_DIR)/HIPHOP_ConfigRead.h
$(SOFTAT_CONFIG_READ_H): $(AUTOCONF_MERGE_FILE)
	@mkdir -p $(dir $@)
	$(Q)$(PRIVATE_PATH)/../HSTIGenerator/Ck5050ini_Generate.py \
		-a $(AUTOCONF_MERGE_FILE) \
		$(PRIVATE_PATH)/SoftATini \
		$(SOFTAT_BUILD_DIR)

LOCAL_PREREQUISITES += \
	$(SOFTAT_CONFIG_READ_H)
</pre>

#### `LOCAL_CUSTOM_TARGETS`

List of custom targets directly managed by the `atom.mk`. Put here anything that
is a target of a rule with commands. Doing so will ensure that the all the
prerequisites that `alchemy` will collect for the module will be applied for
your custom rules.

**Note** : there is no need to put in this list files that are already in
`LOCAL_PREREQUISITES` or `LOCAL_EXPORT_PREREQUISITES`.

#### `LOCAL_EXPORT_C_INCLUDES`, `LOCAL_EXPORT_CFLAGS`, `LOCAL_EXPORT_CXXFLAGS`, `LOCAL_EXPORT_LDLIBS`, `LOCAL_EXPORT_PREREQUISITES`

Variables to be exported by this module and then imported by modules depending
on it. This simplifies the maintenance of the build system by forcing module to
export everything required to use them.

For `internal` modules, `LOCAL_EXPORT_LDLIBS` is rarely used because the build
system knows how to link with it and hence it is not needed to explicitly do so.

For `external` modules it is a mean to instruct the build system how to link
with them. It is however not needed to specify include directories that are
globally available like `$(TARGET_OUT_STAGING)/usr/include`.

#### `LOCAL_EXPORT_CUSTOM_VARIABLES`

This variable can be used to export custom variables to be used by modules
depending on this one. This is a list of `;` separated `<key>=<value>` pairs.
The exported variables can be retrieved in commands of custom rules as
`PRIVATE_CUSTOM_<key>`

**Note** : If you want to use exported variables in `LOCAL_xxx` variables, you
need to use `%{CUSTOM_<key>}` and set `LOCAL_EXPAND_CUSTOM_VARIABLES` to `1`.

#### `LOCAL_ARCHIVE` `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_VERSION` `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_SUBDIR` `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_PATCHES` `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_CMD_UNPACK` `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_CMD_POST_UNPACK`

`Alchemy` offer the possibility to have the source code in an archive. This is
mainly used for external modules but can be used for internal modules as well.

* `LOCAL_ARCHIVE` : name of the archive to be extracted. It is a path relative to
  `LOCAL_PATH`.
* `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_SUBDIR` : directory that the extraction process will automatically
  creates. This is a path, relative to the extraction root where the configure
  script will be found. It is in general defined as
  `$(LOCAL_MODULE)-$(LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_VERSION)`

* `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_VERSION` being a variable with the version of the package. This
information is currently not used by the build system, and is only there as a
convenience.

Additionally, some patches can be applied to the extracted archive :

* `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_PATCHES` : list of patches to apply. Paths relative to `LOCAL_PATH`.

* `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_CMD_UNPACK` : Custom commands to be used instead of default
  ones. Please note that it shall be a macro defined using the `define/endef`
  keywords, not a `:=` definition.
* `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_CMD_POST_UNPACK` : Custom commands to be executed after the
  given step. Please note that it shall be a macro defined using the
  `define/endef` keywords, not a `:=` definition.

#### `LOCAL_DOXYFILE`

Absolute path to a doxygen configuration file for documentation generation. If
defined, the <module>-doc target will use it to generate the documentation. If
not, a doxyfile will be generated on the fly, which will generate a
documentation for all the source files found recursively under `LOCAL_PATH`, for
all the languages supported by doxygen and for all the symbols.

#### `LOCAL_DOXYGEN_INPUT`

Additional path to files or directories to add to doxygen generation. It
accepts either full path or relative path to LOCAL_PATH.

#### `LOCAL_COPY_TO_BUILD_DIR`

If set to 1, all files under LOCAL_PATH will be copied to the build directory
before the configure step. This allows modules to execute autoreconf out of the
original source tree.

`LOCAL_COPY_TO_BUILD_DIR_SKIP_FILES` can be used to list files that should not
be copied (ath relative to `LOCAL_PATH`.

#### `LOCAL_CODEFORMAT_xxx` `LOCAL_CODEFORMAT_xxx_ARGS`

It is possible to customize the formatter used to format source code.

`LOCAL_CODEFORMAT_xxx` can be used to specify either an internal formatter name or
a custom script to use.

If an external script is used, it will be given extra argument as its first
argument and the list of files to format as its second argument.

If `none` is given, the specified language format will be disabled.

`LOCAL_CODEFORMAT_xxx_ARGS` can be used to pass extra argument to the formatter script.

Available languages:
* `C`: default formatter is `clang-format`.
* `CXX`: default formatter is `clang-format`.
* `OBJC`: default formatter is `clang-format`.
* `OBJCXX`: default formatter is `clang-format`.

#### `LOCAL_CODECHECK_xxx` `LOCAL_CODECHECK_xxx_ARGS`

It is possible to customize the checker used to verify source code style.

`LOCAL_CODECHECK_xxx` can be used to specify either an internal checker name or
a custom script to use.

If an external script is used, it will be given extra argument as its first
argument and the list of files to check as its second argument.

If `none` is given, the specified language check will be disabled.

`LOCAL_CODECHECK_xxx_ARGS` can be used to pass extra argument to the checker script.

Available languages:
* `AS`: default checker is `none`.
* `C`: default checkers are `linux` and `clang-format`.
* `CXX`: default checker is `clang-format`.
* `OBJC`: default checker is `none`.
* `OBJCXX`: default checker is `none`.
* `VALA`: default checker is `valastyle`.
* `FORTRAN`: default checker is `none`.

### Internal modules

Defining an `internal` module is the preferred way of registering a module. It
offers many automatization of the build process including compilation, link,
clean, installation, automatic import/export of include directories, compilation
flags.

Variable that can be set for internal modules :

#### `LOCAL_SRC_FILES`

List of files to be compiled. The path shall be relative to `LOCAL_PATH`. The
following file  extension are recognized : `.c, .cc, .cxx, .cpp, .s .S`.
Other files will be ignored.

The build system checks that files actually exist and issue a warning if not.

#### `LOCAL_GENERATED_SRC_FILES`

Similar to `LOCAL_SRC_FILES` but path is relative to module build directory. It
can be used to compile generated files as well as file extracted from an archive.

#### `LOCAL_C_INCLUDES`

List of directories to be added during compilation to search for headers. Full
path shall be specified, without the '-I'. `LOCAL_PATH` can be used for
specifying path under the `atom.mk`.

**Note** : The build directory and `LOCAL_PATH` are automatically added during
compilation

#### `LOCAL_ASFLAGS`, `LOCAL_CFLAGS`, `LOCAL_CXXFLAGS`, `LOCAL_OBJCFLAGS`, `LOCAL_OBJCXXFLAGS`

Flags to be passed during the compilation of source files. `LOCAL_ASFLAGS` is
given only to `asm` files. `LOCAL_CFLAGS` is given to **all** files, whereas
`LOCAL_CXXFLAGS` is given only to `c++` files, `LOCAL_OBJCFLAGS` to
objective-C files, `LOCAL_OBJCXXFLAGS` is given only to `objc++` files and
`LOCAL_FFLAGS` to Fortran files.

**Note** : some warning flags are automatically added by the build system,
please do not add/remove any to let the build system decides which flags are
best suited for the target/toolchain.

**Note** : some checks are done to make sure that some flags are not included
here, `-marm`, `-mthumb` and `-O0` are among them. They are managed by other
means.

#### `LOCAL_LDFLAGS`

Flags to be passed during the linking of the binary (shared library or
executable). It is rarely used. Do not specify libraries to be linked with,
use `LOCAL_LDLIBS`, or better, rely on dependency management to import them
automatically.

#### `LOCAL_LDLIBS`

Libraries to be linked with (`-l<name>`). It is rarely used, please use
dependency management to import them automatically.

#### `LOCAL_ARFLAGS`

Flags to be passed to the static library generator. It is rarely used.

#### `LOCAL_ARM_MODE`

For arm architecture it is used to override the default mode. The default is to
compile everything as `thumb`. This variable can be used to force `arm` mode.
This flag is mainly used when code contains inline assembler that explicitly use
`arm` mode inline instructions.

**Note** : default mode can be globally defined as `arm` with `TARGET_DEFAULT_ARM_MODE`.

**Note** : it is not possible to force `thumb` mode if default mode is `arm`.

#### `LOCAL_FORCE_WHOLE_STATIC_LIBRARY`

Setting this variable to `1` instructs the build system to make sure module
depending on this one will use it inside a `-Wl,-whole-archive` linker flag.
It is rarely used and only when there is some complex use of static libraries.

#### `LOCAL_PBUILD_HOOK`

This variable needs to be set at `1` when a module is using `PAL` log feature.
It instructs the build system to include some additional steps at link time to
mimic some parrot build feature (more precisely it scans for some undefined
variables to declare them in an extra source file compiled and linked).

#### `LOCAL_PBUILD_ALLOW_FORCE_STATIC`

This variable indicates that the module can be build as static if global
variable `TARGET_PBUILD_FORCE_STATIC` is set. This is a ParrotBuild
compatibility mode that allows to specify module as shared and have a fallback
when needed.

#### `LOCAL_NO_COPY_TO_STAGING`

If set to `1`, the module output file will not be copied in staging directory.
This allow customization of this step by the `atom.mk`.

#### `LOCAL_LDSCRIPT`

Optional linker script for an `EXECUTABLE` module. The path shall be relative
to `LOCAL_PATH`. This is usually only used for `baremetal` target OS modules.

### Autotools modules

The term `autotools` refer to modules that use a configure script that generates
makefiles that can then be use to build/install/clean the module. It is
generally open source packages that are taken as is without many modifications.

The source code can be contained in an archive to be extracted before or can be
available under `LOCAL_PATH`.

For source contained in archives, two variables shall be defined :

* `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_ARCHIVE` : name of the archive to be extracted. It is a path
  relative to `LOCAL_PATH`.
* `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_SUBDIR` : directory that the extraction process will
  automatically creates. This is a path, relative to the extraction root where
  the configure script will be found. It is in general defined as
  `$(LOCAL_MODULE)-$(LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_VERSION)`

`LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_VERSION` being a variable with the version of the package.
This information is currently not used by the build system, and is only there as
a convenience.

Additionally, some patches can be applied to the extracted archive :

* `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_PATCHES` : list of patches to apply. Paths relative to
  `LOCAL_PATH`.

**Note** : Internally, alchemy transforms `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_ARCHIVE_XXX` variables
in generic `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_XXX` variables.

For most of such modules it is the only thing to do before registering the
module with :
<pre>
include $(BUILD_AUTOTOOLS)
</pre>

The build system will automatically generate internal rules for all steps :

* unpacking + patches
* configure
* build
* install
* clean

During configure step, the following parameters are automatically given and does
not need to be explicitly specified :

* `--build`
* `--host`
* `--prefix`
* `--sysconfdir`

The values are determined based on the target specifications.

In the environment, the following variables are set during the call to configure :

* `AR`
* `AS`
* `LD`
* `NM`
* `CC`
* `GCC`
* `CXX`
* `CPP`
* `INSTALL`
* `RANLIB`
* `STRIP`
* `OBJCOPY`
* `OBJDUMP`
* `CC_FOR_BUILD`
* `CPPFLAGS`
* `ASFLAGS`
* `CFLAGS`
* `CXXFLAGS`
* `LDFLAGS`

Also, for `pkg-config` to work correctly, the following variable are exported :

* `PKG_CONFIG_PATH`
* `PKG_CONFIG_LIBDIR`
* `PKG_CONFIG_SYSROOT_DIR`

It is possible to customize each step either by modifying environment or
arguments of command used, rewriting commands completely or inserting some
commands between steps.

#### `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_ENV`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_ARGS`

Additional variables to be given as environment or parameters to the configure
script.

#### `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_SCRIPT`

Alchemy will assume that the configure script is named `configure` and located
at either `LOCAL_PATH` or `LOCAL_ARCHIVE_SUBDIR` or `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_ARCHIVE_SUBDIR`.
If the script is somewhere else specify new relative path in `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_SCRIPT`.

#### `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_BUILD_ENV`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS`

Additional variables to be given as environment or parameters to the build
command (using `make`).

#### `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_INSTALL_ENV`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_INSTALL_ARGS`

Additional variables to be given as environment oR parameters to the install
command (using `make`).

#### `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_UNPACK`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_CONFIGURE`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_BUILD`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_INSTALL`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_CLEAN`

Custom commands to be used instead of default ones. Please note that it shall
be a macro defined using the `define/endef` keywords, not a `:=` definition.

#### `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_POST_UNPACK`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_POST_CONFIGURE`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_POST_BUILD`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_POST_INSTALL`, `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_CMD_POST_CLEAN`

Custom commands to be executed after the given step. Please note that it shall
be a macro defined using the `define/endef` keywords, not a `:=` definition.

In the definition of custom commands, the following points shall be noted :

* It is not possible to use any `LOCAL_XXX` variables. If you try to do it an
  error will be generated. You can use any module specific variable that you
  defined or `PRIVATE_XXX` variables listed below.
* Use `$(Q)` before each command to be quiet unless in verbose mode.

* `PRIVATE_ARCHIVE` : Full path to the archive file specified in
  `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_ARCHIVE`.
* `PRIVATE_SRC_DIR` : Full path to the source directory of the module. For
  modules with an archive to be unpacked, it is the same as `PRIVATE_OBJ_DIR`.
* `PRIVATE_OBJ_DIR` : Full path to the directory where the module will be
  configured and built. For modules with an archive to be unpacked it will be
  the directory specified in `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_SUBDIR` inside the build directory,
  otherwise it will be under the directory `obj` inside the build directory.
* `PRIVATE_CONFIGURE_ENV` : Verbatim content of the `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_XXX` variable.
* `PRIVATE_CONFIGURE_ARGS` : Verbatim content of the `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_XXX` variable.
* `PRIVATE_MAKE_BUILD_ENV` : Verbatim content of the `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_XXX` variable.
* `PRIVATE_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS` : Verbatim content of the `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_XXX` variable.
* `PRIVATE_MAKE_INSTALL_ENV` : Verbatim content of the `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_XXX` variable.
* `PRIVATE_MAKE_INSTALL_ARGS` : Verbatim content of the `LOCAL_AUTOTOOLS_XXX` variable.

Some variables containing generic content can also be used :

* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_CPPFLAGS`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_ASFLAGS`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_CFLAGS`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_CXXFLAGS`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_LDFLAGS`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_ENV`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_ARGS`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_ENV`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_ARGS`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_PREFIX`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_SYSCONFDIR`
* `TARGET_AUTOTOOLS_INSTALL_DESTDIR`

**Note** : Old variables still available for compatibility :

* `AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_ENV`
* `AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_ARGS`
* `AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_PREFIX`
* `AUTOTOOLS_CONFIGURE_SYSCONFDIR`
* `AUTOTOOLS_INSTALL_DESTDIR`
* `AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_ENV`
* `AUTOTOOLS_MAKE_ARGS`

### CMake modules

This class of modules if for the compilation of packages that use `cmake`.
`Alchemy` provides internally everything needed for the compilation, in
particular a toolchain file.

#### Customization variables

* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CONFIGURE_ARGS` : Extra arguments for the configure step.
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS` : extra arguments for the build step.
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_MAKE_INSTALL_ARGS` : Extra arguments for the install step.

#### Custom commands

It is possible to override each step of the build.
Please note that it shall be a macro defined using the `define/endef` keywords,
not a `:=` definition.

* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_CONFIGURE`
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_BUILD`
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_INSTALL`
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_CLEAN`
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_POST_CONFIGURE`
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_POST_BUILD`
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_POST_INSTALL`
* `LOCAL_CMAKE_CMD_POST_CLEAN`

### QMake modules

This class of modules if for the compilation of packages that use `qt` and
`qmake`. `Alchemy` provides internally everything needed for the compilation,
in particular a `alchemy.pri` file to be included in your `.pro` to get all
dependencies from atom.mk (include paths, libraries...).

#### Configuration

If the workspace contains a Qt build, then no configuration is needed.

Otherwise, a Qt SDK installation can be used, by specifying a few variables:

* `TARGET_QT_SDKROOT` : Root path of the SDK.
</br>Alchemy will try to automatically detect installed Qt SDK if this is not specified.
* `TARGET_QT_PLATFORM` : Qt platform.
</br>Default is computed automatically based on `TARGET_OS`, `TARGET_OS_FLAVOUR` and `TARGET_ARCH`.
* `TARGET_QT_VERSION` : Qt version.
</br>Default is 4.5.
* `TARGET_QT_SDK` : Path to the Qt SDK for the target platform. This folder
must contain the `qmake` command in the `bin` folder.
</br>Default is `$(TARGET_QT_SDKROOT)/$(TARGET_QT_PLATFORM)/$(TARGET_QT_VERSION)`.

When none of this variables is specified, Alchemy will try to automatically
discover an appropriate Qt SDK, or use qmake in path when targetting the host
system.

#### Customization variables

* `LOCAL_QMAKE_PRO_FILE` : The name of the `.pro` file to be used. If not
  specified, the name is assumed to be `$(LOCAL_MODULE).pro`. The path is
  relative to `LOCAL_PATH`
* `LOCAL_QMAKE_CONFIGURE_ARGS` : Additional arguments to give to qmake.
* `LOCAL_QMAKE_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS` : Additional arguments to give to make build.
* `LOCAL_QMAKE_MAKE_INSTALL_ARGS` : Additional arguments to give to make install.

### Python extension modules

This class of modules is obsolete, please migrate to python package class.

### Python packages modules

This class of modules is used to build and install python packages based on
`distutils` or `setuptools`. It requires the availability of 2 alchemy modules:
* 'host.python': a module that installs a suitable python version in host staging directory.
* 'python': a module that installs a suitable python version in staging directory.

Those two modules should be the same python version, that's why for cross-compilation
it is required to build python for the host as well (it is not possible to use the
one from the `native` host)

For `native` build it is possible to simplify things and skip the compilation of python.
You can simply create symlinks in staging directory to the python executable to use.
Or you can use virtual env to install a dedicated python environment in the staging directory.
An example of such `atom.mk` is available here [python-native-atom.mk](python-native-atom.mk).

#### Customization variables

* `LOCAL_PYTHONPKG_TYPE` : Type of the package (`distutils` or `setuptools`), mandatory.
* `LOCAL_PYTHONPKG_SETUP_PY` : Name of the `setup.py` script to execute (relative to `LOCAL_PATH`).
  Default is `setup.py`.
* `LOCAL_PYTHONPKG_ENV` : Optional extra environment for build/install.
* `LOCAL_PYTHONPKG_BUILD_ARGS` : Optional extra build arguments.
* `LOCAL_PYTHONPKG_INSTALL_ARGS` : Optional extra install arguments.

### Linux kernel modules

This class of modules is for the compilation of Linux kernel modules from
one or several source files. Only `LOCAL_MODULE_FILENAME` (which is optional
and should be a `.ko` filename), `LOCAL_SRC_FILES`, `LOCAL_C_INCLUDES` and
`LOCAL_CFLAGS` are supported in addition to generic module description and
dependency variables.

#### Customization variables

* `LOCAL_LINUX_MAKE_BUILD_ARGS` : Additional variables to be given as parameters
to the kernel build commands (using make).

### GObject introspection type library modules

This class of modules is for the compilation of gobject-introspection `.typelib`
type libraries used by languages bindings to automatically use a library
without explicit wrappers. Only GObject introspection of libraries is currently
supported.

Pulsar gobject-introspection module shoud be present for this to work.

#### Customization variables

* `LOCAL_GI_NAMESPACE` : Mandatory namespace passed to g-ir-scanner.
* `LOCAL_GI_LIBRARY` : Mandatory introspected library passed to g-ir-scanner.
* `LOCAL_GI_ID_PREFIX` : Optional identifier prefix passed to g-ir-scanner.
  If not specified, the namespace is used.

### Prebuilt modules

This class is used to register a module that can be used as a dependency but that
will not built anything. Mainly used for native build where many modules from
the host machine will be used without being recompiled. If the same module is
registered with another class it will be ignored. This allows a workspace normally
used for cross-compilation to be used as-is to compile some native configuration.

As `alchemy` comes with a number of native prebuilt modules, and they have
priority over the ones found in the workspace, it is now possible to explicitely
mark some of them as overriden (for example in `product.mk`) using:
</br>`prebuilt.<module>.override := 1`

### Custom rules

You can add custom rules in you makefile, for example to generate files. However
care must be taken because the `LOCAL_XXX` variables can not be used everywhere.

First, a reminder in makefile terminology. A rule describes `commands` to be
executed for a `target` when `prerequisites` are newer or target does not exist.
<pre>
target: prerequisites
	commands
</pre>

`LOCAL_XXX` variables can be used in `target` and `prerequisites` **but not in `commands`**.
In commands, you can only use `PRIVATE_PATH` and `PRIVATE_MODULE` variables which
correspond to `LOCAL_PATH` and `LOCAL_MODULE`, all other variables will be empty
at the point commands are executed.

If you have a chain of dependencies from the `LOCAL_MODULE_FILENAME` to some
internal targets, don't forget to add them in `LOCAL_CUSTOM_TARGETS` to make
build prerequisites are correctly propagated.

### Host modules

`Alchemy` offers the possibility to compile modules for the host that can be used
as tools by other modules. The registration of a host module is the same as for a
standard module, the only thing that change is that `LOCAL_HOST_MODULE` shall be
used instead of `LOCAL_MODULE`. Dependency management is the same. Internally
the name of the module will be prefixed by `host.` so any reference to the
module name (in another module dependency or in make goals) shall use this prefix.

If a module requires a host tool from a host module to build, it shall add a
dependency in the `LOCAL_DEPENDS_HOST_MODULES` variable.

Host tools are installed in the directory `HOST_OUT_STAGING` and usually in the
`usr/bin` sub-directory.

Note that `$(HOST_OUT_STAGING)/bin` and `$(HOST_OUT_STAGING)/usr/bin` are
automatically added to the `PATH` environment variable for `AUTOTOOLS`,
`CMAKE` and `QMAKE` builds.

There is some `HOST_xxx` variables that are defined internally and that can be
customized before invoking `alchemy`. For the meaning, see the corresponding
`TARGET_xxx` variable. In this list only the default value is indicated.

* `HOST_OUT_BUILD` : `$(TARGET_OUT)/build-host`
* `HOST_OUT_STAGING` : `$(TARGET_OUT)/staging-host`
* `HOST_GLOBAL_C_INCLUDES` :
* `HOST_GLOBAL_ASFLAGS` : empty
* `HOST_GLOBAL_CFLAGS` : `-pipe -O2 -g0`
* `HOST_GLOBAL_CXXFLAGS` : empty
* `HOST_GLOBAL_ARFLAGS` : `rcs`
* `HOST_GLOBAL_LDFLAGS` : empty
* `HOST_GLOBAL_LDLIBS` : empty
* `HOST_GLOBAL_PCHFLAGS` : `-x c++-header`
* `HOST_CC` : `gcc`
* `HOST_CXX` : `g++`
* `HOST_AS` : `as`
* `HOST_AR` : `ar`
* `HOST_LD` : `ld`
* `HOST_NM` : `nm`
* `HOST_STRIP` : `strip`
* `HOST_CPP` : `cpp`
* `HOST_RANLIB` : `ranlib`
* `HOST_OBJCOPY` : `objcopy`
* `HOST_OBJDUMP` : `objdump`

**Note** : `include`, `lib` and `usr/lib` folders under `HOST_OUT_STAGING` are
automatically added to corresponding flags.

### CPU features

`Alchemy` automatically sets some variables that can be used by user `atom.mk`
to build specific source files based on available CPU features.

Currently, the following variables are available:

* `TARGET_CPU_HAS_NEON` : Neon instructions are available on target.
* `TARGET_CPU_HAS_SSE2` : SSE2 instructions are available on target.
* `TARGET_CPU_HAS_SSSE3` : SSSE3 instructions are available on target.

## A closer look to dependencies

One feature of `alchemy` is dependencies management. Each module specifies modules
required for building (`LOCAL_LIBRARIES`) and for runtime (`LOCAL_DEPENDS_MODULES`).
During configuration phase, those dependencies are handled via `select` commands
in the kconfig language.

Before building checks are done to make sure dependencies are OK, and error/warnings
are issue in case of anomalies found.

Include directories, compiler/linker flags and libraries exported by a module are
automatically imported by a module that depends on it.

For static libraries it is even recursive, it exports automatically their dependencies.
The order of link of static libraries is also automatically done so that the
order given in an atom.mk is not a problem.

For example, if `A` is an executable and `B`, `C`, `D`, and `E` are static libraries.
If dependencies are as below:
<pre>
A->E,B
B->C,D
C->D,E
</pre>

The full link order for A will be:
<pre>
A -> B,C,D,E
</pre>

## SDK generation

Given a build configuration, `Alchemy` can generate a `SDK` to be used in another
configuration. The `SDK` will contain the staging content as well as all headers
found in directories exported by modules. The generated `SDK` will also contain
an `atom.mk` that will describe modules.

To generate a `SDK`:
<pre>
make sdk
</pre>
This will generate a `sdk` folder in `$(TARGET_OUT)` as well as a zip file of
this folder in `$(TARGET_OUT)/$(TARGET_PRODUCT_FULL_NAME)`.

To use a `SDK`, specify the directory where the `atom.mk` is in the variable
`TARGET_SDK_DIRS`. Several directories can be specified. Using a `SDK` is
transparent for users, dependencies shall be specified in the same way. The only
difference is that modules from `SDK` won't appear in global config and will not
be built.

The variable `TARGET_SDK_PUBLIC_MODULES` can be used to specify a subset of
module to include in the generated sdk. It will also include recursively
dependencies markes as `PUBLIC`.

By default the generated sdk can only be used by the exact same environment and
in particular the same version of the compiler. Variable `TARGET_SDK_ALLOW_OLDER_CC`
and/or `TARGET_SDK_ALLOW_NEWER_CC` can be set to `1` to extend the compatibility.

Also, the `setup.mk` in generated sdk will contain the value of `TARGET_CROSS`.
If the sdk is allowed to be used in other environment, vthe variable
`TARGET_SDK_OPTIONAL_CROSS` can be set to 1 to check for existence silently
and fallback on local toolchain in `PATH`.

## Codecheck for C false positives or intentional deviations

You can ignore specific C codecheck warnings in a C source code file by inserting
a tag with the following syntax in a comment line just preceding the line with
the error:

<pre>
	codecheck_ignore[TYPE1(,TYPE2...)]
</pre>

Where TYPE is the message type returned by `make <module>-codecheck-c`
(for example `LONG_LINE`, `NEW_TYPEDEFS`, etc).

Ex:
<pre>
	/* codecheck_ignore[NEW_TYPEDEFS,LONG_LINE] */
	typedef struct _CustomTypedef CustomTypedef; /* custom typedef for consistency with other GObjects */
</pre>

You can also ignore a warning for a whole file by using:

<pre>
	codecheck_ignore_file[TYPE1(,TYPE2...)]
</pre>

If `TYPE` is `ALL`, *all* codecheck warnings will be disabled for the file

## Codecheck for C++ false positives or intentional deviations

You can ignore specific c++ codecheck warnings in a C++ source code file by inserting
a tag with the following syntax in a comment line to the line with
the error:

<pre>
	NOLINT(category)
</pre>

Where category is the message returned by `make <module>-codecheck-cxx`
(for example `whitespace/braces`, etc).  NOLINT or NOLINT(*)
suppresses errors of all categories on that line.

Ex:
<pre>
	static int my_function()
	{  // NOLINT(whitespace/braces)
</pre>

## Codecheck for Vala false positives or intentional deviations

You can ignore specific vala codecheck warnings in a Vala source code file by inserting
a tag with the following syntax in a comment line to the line with the error:

<pre>
	NOLINT
</pre>

If you want to ignore multiple line you can use the following syntax:

<pre>
	NOLINT_START
	...
	NOLINT_STOP
</pre>

Ex:

<pre>
	static int my_function()
	{  // NOLINT
		int v1;
	// NOLINT_START
	int v2;
	// NOLINT_STOP
</pre>

## How to use it

After describing how to create a makefile that is integrated in `alchemy`, let's
see how to call `alchemy` to actually build a project.

### Wrapper script

`Alchemy` build system needs a few parameters to known what to do. The `TARGET_XXX`
variables need to be set in the environment. However, without anything it will
defaults to compile natively in a linux pc without any configuration directory.
Output directories will also be selected by default. A typical wrapper script
will look like this (assuming alchemy is at the root of the workspace):

<pre>
#!/bin/bash

readonly TOP_DIR=`pwd`

export TARGET_PRODUCT="pclinux"
export TARGET_CONFIG_DIR=${TOP_DIR}/config
export TARGET_OUT=${TOP_DIR}/out
export ALCHEMY_USE_COLORS=1

# This can be put in a product.mk file located in ALCHEMY_TARGET_CONFIG_DIR
export TARGET_OS="linux"
export TARGET_OS_FLAVOUR="native"
export TARGET_LIBC="native"
export TARGET_ARCH="x86"

time ${TOP_DIR}/alchemy/scripts/alchemake.py -f ${TOP_DIR}/alchemy/main.mk $*
</pre>

**Note**: `alchemake.py` is a simple python script that wraps the invocation of
`make` to stop the compilation at the first error seen. It is purely optional
but without it, a parallel compilation will continue if a error is seen until
current targets are finished, which can be long if a kernel or busybox
compilation is in progress.

### Command line options

You can specify some variables in the `make` command line to activate some extra
features.

* `var-<VAR>` : Prints the contents of the variable `<VAR>` interpreted by alchemy and exits.
* `F=1` : Force re-checking external modules for modifications. By default they
  are not checked to speed-up thing. Note that if a module is explicitly given
  as a goal in `make` command, it will be re-checked.
* `V=1` : Activate verbose mode. Commands executed will be printed.
* `W=1` : Activate extra warnings for `internal` modules.

**Note**: To have more information, you can type `./build.sh help`. This is a
special goal inside `alchemy`. If you type `./build.sh --help`, you will get the
help of the `make` program, not the help of `alchemy`.

